---
layout: post
title:  "Handicap, and it's affect on bowling..."
date:   2024-02-10 22:40:02 -0800
categories: bowling
---
Bowling is a dying sport and that is a point all bowlers must come to terms to. Veterans of the sport leave everyday because the sport just isn't what it used to be.
As an avid bowler myself, I find being discouraged by the fact I simply can not compete anymore in tournaments. It isn't a problem with me, how I bowl, or anything even related
to personal aspects. It is the fact handicap simply is gives too much to the newbies and leaves too little for any of the experienced players. Handicap gives newer players too much
and completely removes the skill aspect of the game. Virtually anyone can join a handicap bowling tournament, even if they have no experience, and take home a top 3 win.
It is simply too difficult to compete with these new players anymore. What is the point of me practicing and getting better as a bowler if I will simply be beaten by people who
have barely bowled in their lives?

My most recent expierence where the handicap difference was just so large, it was actually impossible for me to even compete with the player unless I did the best bowling in my life.
In this scenario, the player had 340 pins of total handicap that was added to his 3 game series at the end of the tourney. He bowled 306 pins in total, a roughly 102 average for the 3 games. With his 340 pins of handicap however he technically placed on the leaderboard as if he bowled a 646 pin series. He ended up placing 2nd that tournament taking home $250.00 in scholarship fund for doing absolutely nothing. I had brought this up to one of my good bowling friends and he noted that he had a mental disability and that he couldn't communicate properly. However, this is not an excuse to take away the chance at a top 3 finish for other bowlers who have practiced and work hard to get to a point to be competitive in the sport. In fact, it contradicts the definition of equality. If we were to make oppurtunities equal for all the bowlers, a bowler with a mental disability, which doesn't affect one's ability to bowl, should have to bowl good, to be able to compete with someone who has been practicing bowling to achieve a higher average. As for me in that tournament, I averaged 171. This was definetly not my best performance but it wasn't too bad either. However, although I averaged almost 70 pins more than this 2nd place finisher, I was still pushed down into 17th place because of overwhelming amount of bowlers with high handicaps in my division.

Even as a youth bowler, it feels almost pointless to compete in these tournaments. There is almost no way for me to compete in any competitive setting unless the tournament is scratch (no handicap). You'd think since handicap has proven to be such a big problem for experienced bowlers, there'd be more scratch tournaments right? Wrong, it is actually the other way around. As more experienced bowlers are pushed out of the competitive scene that isn't the PBA or Collegiate scene, the amount of scratch tournaments decreases, and the amount of handicap tournaments increases. This is because USBC branches and other tournament organizers need to appeal to larger audiences. I don't blame these organizers however, as long as the sport isn't dying as quickly as we are told, it is fine by me, and probably fine for many other experienced bowlers in the field.
